
Causes of the Crash

1) Lack of quality home game ports and originals. Atari Pac Man and ET are most often cited as emblematic of the poor quality of games in 1982.

2) Too much supply, too many consoles. Overstocks caused the now famous Atari landfills. This really hurt smaller companies like Activision who, while they produced quality games, were far more expensive than the bargain bin ones.

3) Economics: Peak of recession was Nov-Dec 1982, S&L crisis, high interest rates, high inflation, high unemployment. 1982 Cristmas shopping season was very poor for video games.

4) Lack of innovation, lack of novelty. Een at arcades. Dragon's Lair was popular for short period of time. Purchase of conversion kits was very large, but not so many new games.

5) Lawsuits: rarely mentioned but by this time there were numerous long lasting lawsuits between manufacturers: Magnavox v Atari, Coleco v. Atari, Cinematronics v Vectorbeam. Fighting over characters, licenses, patents, games, and so on.

6) Bans & Moral Panics. Games seen as violent, expensive, and distracting. Many municipalities banned arcades. By the time the arcades won 1st amendment cases against bans it was too late.

7) Explosion of third parties. Started by Activision. Too many publishers making too many low quality games. Related to #2. This was, in a sense, a consequence of the crash of 1977.

8) Competition from home computers esp. Commodore & Apple.

9) Waste, Fraud & Corruption. Atari is hugely wasteful and managers charged with insider trading. Cinematronics is very corrupt and lazy in its dealings.

10) No sustainable business models established. Matel loses millions by selling it's console at a loss. Atari has no product cycle to speak of. Atari manufactures too many games and pays too much for licenses.

Consequences of the Crash

1) Bankruptcies, sales, layoffs, and abandoning the industry.
    Bally switches to healthclubs & casinos
    Atari splits in two & abandons console gaming
    Activision rolls back and focuses on computers
    Coleco focuses on cabbage patch and eventually folds (withdraws ADAM)
    Mattel quits business
    3rd parties disappear (US Games, Mystique, etc)

2) Console Technology halted
    7800 cancelled
    Famicom US release delayed until 1986
    Atari labs vanish and other companies pick up R&D employees (Apple gets Allen Kay, Paul Allen hires Brenda Laurel)
    Vectrex is stillborn
    CD/LD consoles delayed until 1990's

3) Arcades change focus
    focuses on action and fighting games (violence becomes a staple of arcade games)
    Many arcades go out of business

4) Computer Gaming becomes popular
    era of Apple II, Macintosh, Spectrum, Commodore games
    paves path for companies like sierra and designers like Will Wright (activision buys infocom)

5) Retailers resist selling new video game consoles
    Best shown with story of Nintendo

6) Nintendo places tight controls on third parties and quality controls

7) Manufacture moved overseas

8) Japan becomes dominant force in console gaming for almost 2 decades
    Atari sold it's Japanese investments to Namco in 1984
    Nintendo faces many antitrust lawsuits and anti-Japanese sentiment

9) Spectrum is dominant in UK



